The network we consider is bipartite: there are two types of nodes (GPs and patients), and there are only edges connecting GPs with patients. Most previous studies have used unipartite network (or one-mode network) which is a projection from the bipartite, containing only one type of node (i.e. GPs only) and the edges indicating number of shared patients. As a result, the projected network contains less information, and this is challenging in particular with solo GPs who have few shared patients and often being merged with a big network. 
Identifying GP communities (or Provider Practice Communities -PPCs) is a process of graph partitioning, communities detection or finding clusters in the networks. The common used approach, utilising the modularity maximation, has been shown to be non-robust with the problem of resolution limit, the phenomenon that small communities cannot be identified.  In this analysis, we utilised an approach proposed by Peixoto which is based on a hierarchical stochastic blockmodel: GPs and patients are clustered into blocks, and two connections, e.g. (GP 1, patient 1) and (GP 2, patient 2), are equally likely if GP1 and GP2 are from the same block of GPs and patient 1 and patient 2 are from the same block of patients. A partition which maximizes the likelihood is deemed optimal; such a partition consists of blocks of GPs which tend to be connected to the same group(s) of patients. By hierarchically fitting blockmodels at different resolution levels, the resolution limit problem is avoided.
The hierarchical stochastic blockmodelling approach is also designed to avoid overfitting (i.e. identifying too many blocks) via Occam's Razor theory (ref): the chosen model is the one that best compresses the data. Because almost 2000 GPs in this data have seen fewer than 5 patients, some indications showed that some communities with single GP were grouped into one block. Therefore, the next step after fitting the model was to identify GP communities as the connected components within each block; that is, communities are distinct groups of GPs within a block that do not share patients with any other groups.
